# Document 3

*A personal reflection for each of the 6 days written as a document (pdf or word or txt, one paragraph per day). To get started, you can try answering the questions: "Why is this important? How can it improve my research work?" However any other personal reflection is welcome. Evaluation criteria: we expect reflections that are related to the content of each of the six days.*

The CodeRefinery tools workshop covered a variety of topics, including version control with Git and GitHub, collaborative code development, and good programming practices. My prior knowledge and experience gave me a good understanding of version control using both local and remote repositories. However, although I worked within a collaborative framework, it was entirely on my own research code. This meant that I was the only one branching, merging, creating issues, and making pull requests in the same repository. In the following lines, I will share what I have learned through this short but insightful course.

On the previous day and the first day of the workshop, I rehearsed my skills in setting up a version control environment on my local computer. This task was particularly relevant to my current situation, as I recently changed position and job. It reminded me that a well-crafted installation guide can save a lot of time and headaches. I also learned how to use the nano text editor within the command line during this course. I believe this text editor will become a very useful tool for quickly creating and editing simple markdown documents without switching interfaces from bash. Additionally, I had always struggled to set up the terminal to use conda tools or libraries. Until now, I had been using the Miniconda PowerShell, but after the workshop, I am now able to work from the terminal. In this way, I will be more efficient in my research work. 

From day two, I would like to highlight two more tools I learned and want to incorporate into my daily routine: inspecting history and setting aliases for Git bash. The former is quite insightful because it helps you understand not only how the code has been developed but also the commit style and coding practices of the team. The latter helps save a lot of time when committing to remote names. As a result, I would reduce my mistakes, have a better period of adaptation, and flow with the coding style of the group when I move between teams. This would allow me to focus more on analysis and development of my research work instead of repetitive tasks.

On day three, as I mentioned, I was used to working with Git and GitHub on my own in my own repository. The collaborative exercise was really exciting, from creating the issue to making the pull request and reviewing the code. Now, I have the basic tools to work in more complex scientific research environments. This experience will take me from solitary endeavors to participating in worldwide research efforts in environmental science, my field. Additionally, I will be able to collaborate with cutting-edge research teams that use version control on a daily basis. This will expand my scientific horizons.   

When we discussed reproducible research in day four, I always thought it meant developing packages or libraries by logically linking components, functions, tests, and documentation. While creating packages is a good start for reproducibility, it is not exhaustive. Packages help maintain workflow control, but they can break easily without proper maintenance and do not fit every project, such as those focused on graph-based work. As I learned in the workshop, reproducibility is more than just creating packages. It is about organizing your projects, linking data, recording code flow, and managing environments. Ensuring reproducibility in science and code-based research is a challenge that needs to be addressed from the beginning to the end of every new project.

On the fifth day of the workshop, I learned about some tools and frameworks to construct good documentation, ranging from in-code comments to external documents. One key takeaway is that documentation is essential in various aspects of a project’s code, depending on its scope and objectives. In-code comments are invaluable for collaborators and developers working directly on the code. During the workshop, Doxygen was mentioned as a tool for deploying documentation. Since my work focuses on R code, I found alternatives like ROxygen. This tool creates templates to document functions, which, if followed, provide a complete description for both developers and users. Additionally, README files are crucial for helping collaborators and new contributors get started with the project. User documentation is also vital for explaining key features and installation processes to end-users. In my own research, I would suggest using more wikis and external static site HTML. This is because I have overused README files, mixing user and collaborator documentation, which has sometimes resulted in a mess. 

Finally, on day six, we focused on testing and modular code development. In my research, I had used “testing” but it was kind of manual. When I found bugs while running code, I would start debugging inside the function or concatenated functions by adjusting parameters until I found where it was broken. However, after several hundred lines and concatenated functions, this method became cumbersome and unreliable. The testing frameworks presented in the workshop were quite insightful. I learned that testing needs to be integrated from the beginning of a project and systematically planned by the researcher or development team. 

I am very pleased to have attended this workshop. I learned a variety of tools, frameworks of thinking, and planning strategies that I expect to introduce into my daily activities to enhance my research work.